Adding numbers to a trade-off
I hold by the principle that if a thing can be defined, it can be measured. Unfortunately it often isn't, or it may require better techniques even if you can think of something that could be measured. Philosophy would probably refute me, but I'm not a philosopher.
The definition of the trade-off allows the possibility of measuring the two halves of the trade-off (I'm all the while dealing with only 2D trade-offs. Obviously you can have more complex trade-offs) and drawing a graph of the results. This is a Pareto curve (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_efficiency). It can have a number of interpretations, but importantly none of them is polarised in the same way that "contradictions" are.
The clue is therefore to search for trade-offs where a Pareto curve is presented. Better still is where the trade-off has been quantified so that the Pareto curve can be drawn as a criterion, and the quality of the trade-off can be measured by how closely the data follow that curve.
A nice example is Suen, J. Y., and S. Navlakha. 2019. "Travel in city road networks follows similar transport trade-off principles to neural and plant arbors." J R Soc Interface, 16 (154): 2019 0041. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2019.0041. or https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31088262. although the ideas are more clearly explained in Conn, A., U. V. Pedmale, J. Chory, and S. Navlakha. 2017. "High-resolution laser scanning reveals plant architectures that reflect universal network design principles." Cell Syst, 5 (1): 53-62 e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.06.017. or https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28750198..
These are very obvious examples in that the model is more or less abstract. Unfortunately neither of these papers even tries to analyse the rules or principles that guide the geometry of the routes chosen. Therefore for my purposes they are not useful, since I can derive nothing from them that I can apply to a problem where, by definition, all I can define is the trade-off. In fact only half the papers that identify a trade-off bother to investigate the factors that control it. I keep those on one side in the hope that I can have a guess at what the answer might be, hence the current drive to use AI methods. But these tend to look at populations, whereas I need to look at individual examples.
