The first biomimetic material
I've always called it "George's Wood" because George invented it. It's a fibrous composite with a cunning structure just like wood. Wood is made of long tubular cells arranged in parallel up and down the stem; in the walls of the cells nanofibrils of cellulose, embedded in lignin, wind helically around a central void.
In the early 1970s George Jeronimidis, working with Jim Gordon (who wrote The New Science of Strong Materials, compulsory reading for any engineer irrespective of status) at Reading University, made models of wood with tubes of helically wound glass fibres, impregnated with resin. Importantly the fibre winding was at 15 degrees to the long axis of the tube; not only is this angle commonly found in wood cells, but George's analysis showed that it's the sweet spot in the trade-off between longitudinal stiffness and strength and the work of fracture. This was confirmed by experiment. In tension the fibres in the tube wall tend to rotate in line with the strain until the resin between the fibres fails in shear. This allows the fibres to reorientate and the tube to extend with the fibres still supporting a load. This pseudoductility is remarkable since glass and epoxy (and cellulose and lignin in wood) are brittle. The tubes buckle inwards and pull away from each other. In wood this increases the area of the fracture surface to at least 200 times the nominal section area. These mechanisms result in graceful and tough failure. A plate of George's Wood in a drop-weight test had specific energy absorption five times greater than toughened steel. Like wood you can join it with nails or screws and inject resin down the tubes to repair damage. A solid sheet of CFRP shattered when a bullet was fired into it. George's Wood held the bullet and had 85-90% residual strength. As body armour you can stab it with a knife but you can't pull the knife out for further thrusts which cause the major wounds.
The tubes in George's Wood can be made with any fibre or mixture of fibres and at different sizes, depending on the threat. The overall properties arise from structure, not from specific materials; the important factor is the angle between the fibres and the longitudinal voids when the tube wall buckles or bends it needs somewhere to go; the voids are integral to the behaviour. 
Structure is one of the roots of biology, and structure requires assembly. The two coloured graphs show this more generally (Fig 3). They were generated from several thousand data points from the internet and from research papers. They show the proportion of problems resolved by each of six parameters at sizes ranging from atomic to environmental. Of course such general parameters overlap in their classification and the data are imprecise. Even so the two graphs are very different. In technology energy rules, especially at the level of materials processing; heterogeneity (related to information) is destroyed to generate material that is more easily manipulated during manufacture. Raw material is also important. By contrast, energy is hardly significant in biology, partly because all processing is done at ambient temperatures. The significant factors are information and structure: information (ultimately from DNA) directs the organisation of structure. Structure presents many opportunities. George's Wood is just one example.

